something is happening in the Middle
East and it's more than just another
headline israel has struck Iran and the
world is now being pulled into a
conflict that may not end quickly and as
Israel calls on the United States for
support we stand at the edge of a chain
reaction that could send shock waves
through every part of our lives if the
US gets involved Iran may retaliate and
the consequences won't just be overseas
they will show up at our gas stations in
our grocery stores in our workplaces
fuel prices are poised to skyrocket
inflation could surge making it harder
to afford the basics jobs could be at
risk and the stability we take for
granted might slip away this isn't just
another crisis to scroll past this could
be the moment that changes everything we
need to pay attention we need to be
ready because when the world's tensions
boil over the fallout doesn't stay
contained it reaches every one of us i'm
John Lanerborg and this is Economic
Circuit let's prepare together reported
along the border
welcome to Economic Circuit where we
break down the forces driving our global
economy from the history of major
companies to today's shifting trends
we're here to make complex topics clear
and relevant
it's always sudden until it isn't
gasoline lines snake around corners
flights vanish from airport boards the
news says it's temporary but the world
outside feels different thinner on edge
we were promised an age of energy
independence but the future keeps
circling back to oil this time it's not
an embargo or a distant OPEC meeting its
missiles burning refineries a war that
nobody voted for but everyone will pay
for the world's oldest addiction has
returned with new symptoms supply chain
bruises rising fairs rumors of rationing
all echoing through silent supermarket
aisles every headline is louder but the
system behind it is quieter it's as if
the world wants us to notice the chaos
but forget the design what is an oil
crisis and are we about to live through
another one there's a strange comfort in
routine you fill your car you pay a
price you forget the machine behind it
but every few decades the illusion
breaks 1973
gas stations shuttered the world waiting
for fuel that would not come 1979
revolution in Iran the price of a barrel
doubles this is unreal isn't this
disgusting why doesn't anybody contact
the president then doubles again panic
becomes the atmosphere
1990 war in the Gulf missiles over oil
fields supply lines tangled in smoke and
speculation
2022 tanks roll into Ukraine traders and
governments scramble believing
technology would shield them from
scarcity a crisis isn't just a moment
it's a revelation it reminds us how much
of modern life balances on invisible
threads shipping lanes refinery valves
insurance guarantees
now June 2025
another ghost steps out from the shadows
it's not the same but it rhymes a
missile lands in the world's largest gas
field a refinery burns the Strait of
Hormuz artery for 20% of all global oil
trembles with new threats
suddenly it's not about Middle East
politics or nuclear ambitions it's about
who eats who moves who works and who
waits in the dark but this isn't just
history repeating it's a reminder that
nothing really changed only the
headlines we thought oil crises belonged
to old news reels but the story never
ended it only paused and before we move
forward if this perspective resonates
and you'd like to see more content that
challenges the news cycle consider
joining me on Patreon even small support
goes further than you'd think
as this latest crisis unfolds the
complexity isn't just geopolitical it's
personal it's your commute your job your
ability to plan for tomorrow the old
belief that someone somewhere was
keeping it all running smoothly that's
gone we're left with the raw mechanics
of survival who adapts who profits who
is forced to sacrifice every empire has
its pressure points for the modern world
it's a narrow blue channel 34 miles
across linking the Persian Gulf to the
open seas
the straight of Hormuz
oneif of the planet's oil flows through
this corridor each day a number so large
it feels abstract but abstraction
disappears when risk becomes reality the
world built its prosperity on the
promise that oil would keep moving that
no one would dare shut off the tap but
every promise has an expiration date
when missiles fell on refineries in June
2025 that promise snapped
suddenly ships waited offshore insurance
premiums doubled and rumors of blockades
traveled faster than any super tanker a
single spark whether sabotage human
error or political gamble was enough to
set global markets on edge every data
feed started flashing red
futures traders heads buried in
terminals felt the price leap in seconds
7% in a day then more no one knew where
it would stop for most people the news
was just numbers brent WTI percentage
points and barrel counts but numbers
became stories flights canled overnight
food prices nudged upward by a supply
chain suddenly strangled old fears
resurfaced in new disguises fuel
rationing brownouts companies quietly
preparing contingency plans the oil
crisis stopped being a hypothetical it
became a spectacle performed across TV
studios debated in the halls of power
traded on the screens of hedge funds but
for every headline there was an absence
the world had built layer upon layer of
complexity derivative contracts energy
swaps alternate shipping routes promises
of energy transition but complexity
isn't resilience sometimes it's
camouflage a way of hiding the truth
that after all these years everything
still turns on a few vital choke points
and that the margin for error is smaller
than anyone wants to believe this is how
systems drift from confidence to
fragility from certainty to
improvisation
and when the illusion finally breaks the
stories we tell ourselves fall silent
the second gas line this morning what
happened at the first one they ran out
and as the crisis deepens the game
becomes one of survival and adaptation
there is no clear path out only the
constant tension of who will absorb the
shock and who will quietly benefit as
the rest scramble
every shock rearranges the world when
the price of oil jumps so does
everything built to top it the cost of
bread the fair for a flight the budget
for a nation and yet scarcity is never
shared equally history teaches us oil
crises crown new kings and create new
casualties
in 1973 the embargo enriched a handful
of exporters leaving Western economies
to ration to fret to shrink in 1979
panic drove inflation while some
speculators made fortunes betting on the
collapse of order 2025 is no different
just more crowded more interconnected
more quietly ruthless
for some the crisis is a windfall
american shale fields hum back to life
investors sense profit in the volatility
and oil-rich states outside the war zone
quietly fill the gap selling at a
premium while pretending to mourn
instability
prochemical giants tanker fleets even
some governments these actors find new
leverage in every price surge to them
the spectacle of scarcity is not
disaster but opportunity
for most it's a slow motion blow farmers
watch fertilizer costs rise truckers
count shrinking margins manufacturers
debate shutting lines food inflation
ripples from distant ports to local
supermarkets energy poverty once a
phrase for the developing world creeps
back into headlines in Europe and Asia
but the real effect is harder to measure
it's not just in ledgers or policy
briefings but in trust a society that
once believed in endless abundance
starts to remember what it's like to
fear the dark old anxieties return
rationing hoarding anger at strangers in
line central banks caught between rising
prices and slowing economies hesitate do
they raise rates to fight inflation
risking recession or hold steady and let
costs spiral every solution is a gamble
every policy has a hidden loser and
still there are those who whisper that
this is just the market working that
scarcity is a sign of healthy correction
not failure but watch closely the ones
who speak most about resilience are
often those with the thickest walls the
deepest stockpiles the safest escape
plans most people meanwhile are left
with uncertainty and blame
in the background the same powerful
interests play out familiar rituals
debating sanctions drawing new red lines
making sure the fallout hits those with
the least margin we're told these crises
are accidents lightning strikes in the
machinery of global trade but look
closer and a pattern emerges the flash
points are never random but every
guarantee has its price every
intervention be it in the name of
freedom stability or market efficiency
ends up written in the language of
crisis behind each embargo and missile
strike is a boardroom a set of donors a
network of think tanks spinning
narratives for the evening news the
names change the interests don't when
the bombs fall it's never the architects
who cue for fuel or wonder how they'll
heat their homes it's the clerk the
nurse the factory worker the invisible
majority paying for the illusions of
empire
america's elites learned long ago how to
profit from chaos they hedge the risk
short the market then walk away with
bonuses as the cost of living doubles
for everyone else sanctions blockades
military options these aren't mistakes
they're levers and when they're pulled
the shock travels everywhere except
upward politicians in Washington debate
the shape of the world ordinary people
get to feel it when an oil crisis erupts
it's called an act of God but behind
every act of God is a human hand holding
a pen signing a deal drawing a line on a
map it's never really about the oil it's
about the stories told to justify
control and the millions condemned to
live with the consequences
the oil crisis is not a natural disaster
it's a ritual a show of force that
reminds the world who sets the rules and
who lives by them so if you find
yourself asking why this keeps happening
why the costs always land on the same
shoulders know that you're not alone the
machine keeps running not because it
works for everyone but because it was
built for a select few the Empire will
keep finding new crises there will
always be another red line another
freedom of navigation operation another
headline promising that the world is on
the brink and the architects will be
safe behind gates portfolios and special
dispensations
the rest of us will be told to tighten
belts to be resilient to trust that the
system still works but the truth is the
system was never built for us each
crisis is a reminder not of oil's power
but of whose lives are spent to keep it
flowing
in the end the circuit completes itself
a loop of cause and consequence with the
same winners and the same losers
so ask yourself who really benefits when
the world runs dry and who is always
left to clean up the spill
